Add Nautobot Monitoring documentation (#8929)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/user-guide/administration/monitoring/backing-stores.md

```sql
SELECT
    LEFT(query, 80) AS query,
    calls,
    ROUND(total_exec_time::numeric, 0) AS total_ms,
    ROUND(mean_exec_time::numeric, 1) AS mean_ms
FROM pg_stat_statements
WHERE query NOT LIKE '%pg_stat%'
ORDER BY total_exec_time DESC
LIMIT 20;
```

The query above can be run from `psql` directly, or — for environments where operators don't have direct database access — through `nautobot-server dbshell`, which opens a `psql`/`mysql` session using Nautobot's own database credentials.

The biggest offenders are usually filter combinations on large tables without a supporting index, or N+1 query loops in Job code.

`pg_stat_statements` aggregates across the whole database. When you have not yet identified *which* view is slow, start with the [Visualization — View Latency](./visualization.md#6-view-latency) dashboard — its Top-N panel surfaces the slowest Nautobot views in Grafana, after which the offending queries can be tracked down here. To trace a slow query back to the specific *Nautobot view or Job* that issued it, also enable [Request Profiling](./request-profiling.md) — `django-silk` records each request's SQL queries with timing.

### Long-Running Transactions

> Nautobot Jobs that wrap a multi-thousand-row update in `with transaction.atomic():` keep a transaction open for the duration of the loop. That's fine in isolation, but it (a) holds row locks, (b) prevents `VACUUM` from reclaiming dead tuples, and (c) consumes a PgBouncer slot in `transaction` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nautobot Jobs that wrap a multi-thousand-row update in `with transaction.atomic():` keep a transaction open for the duration of the loop. That's fine in isolation or smaller and thus shorter updates, but the transaction holds row locks, prevents `VACUUM` from reclaiming dead tuples, and consumes a PgBouncer slot in `transaction` mode.
```

Reviewer: Can you expand on what this

> prevents `VACUUM` from reclaiming dead tuples

means in practice?

Author: Amended for clarity.

Detect:

```sql
SELECT
    pid,
    NOW() - xact_start AS xact_duration,
    state,
    LEFT(query, 100) AS query
FROM pg_stat_activity
WHERE state = 'active'
  AND xact_start < NOW() - INTERVAL '10 minutes'
ORDER BY xact_start;
```

For continuous monitoring rather than one-off `psql` checks, wrap the same query in a periodic Nautobot Job using Django's database cursor — that way the alerting flows through the standard `JobLogEntry` and worker-`stdout` channels:

```python
from django.db import connection

with connection.cursor() as cursor:
    cursor.execute(
        """
        SELECT pid, NOW() - xact_start AS xact_duration, state, LEFT(query, 100)
        FROM pg_stat_activity
        WHERE state = 'active' AND xact_start < NOW() - INTERVAL '10 minutes'
        ORDER BY xact_start
        """
    )
    for pid, duration, state, query in cursor.fetchall():
        self.logger.warning(
            "Long-running transaction: pid=%s duration=%s state=%s query=%s",
            pid, duration, state, query,
        )

> ```

Reviewer: It's not clear to me what these sql and  and sample django code calling an sql is meant to be? Is this a recommendation? Is this something to be seen in the logs?

Author: The first SQL statement is meant to be run directly against the DB to detect long running transactions. I'm removing the suggestion to wrap it into a Nautobot Job and instead suggesting to use Grafana for that purpose.

The fix on the application side is almost always to break the Job into smaller transactional batches — a per-chunk `transaction.atomic()` rather than one wrapping the entire loop.

### HA-Specific Signals

> `pg_isready` confirms the server is accepting TCP connections; it does **not** check whether the node is in recovery (read-only). In a Patroni / repmgr / RDS multi-AZ topology, a connection probe will pass against a follower that Nautobot cannot write to. Add `psql -c "SELECT NOT pg_is_in_recovery();"` as a secondary probe — it returns `t` only on the primary, so a failed promotion gets caught at the probe layer instead of as a flood of 5xx after the first write. See [Health Checks — PostgreSQL](./health-checks.md#postgresql).

Reviewer: follower is not a term I have used, is it standard? Would read replica be better?

Author: Changed "follower" to "node" for clarity.

> ### Disk-Trajectory Monitoring

Reviewer: I like how this section worked out, can we come up with a flow of the same for each section? Something like:

* Potential Issue: 
* Artifact or data
* Query
* Suggested resolution(s)

Author: Nice suggestion, applied. I also did something similar to the Logging section. Take a look and let me know if you're happy.

> # Backing Stores

Reviewer 2: Is "backing store" standard jargon? Don't think I've encountered it in our docs outside of this PR.

    - For Redis configuration options (broker URL, cache backends), see [Configuration — Redis](../configuration/redis.md).

## Redis

### Key Redis Metrics

Deploy [`redis_exporter`](https://github.com/oliver006/redis_exporter) alongside each Redis instance. Metrics worth alerting on:

| Metric | What it tells you | Suggested threshold |
|---|---|---|
| `redis_memory_used_bytes / redis_memory_max_bytes` | Memory headroom | `> 0.8` for 10 minutes — see [Alerting](./alerting.md) |
| `redis_evicted_keys_total` | Cache eviction rate | rate > 0 on broker DB indicates `noeviction` was wrongly disabled |
| `redis_blocked_clients` | Clients waiting on `BRPOPLPUSH`, etc. | `> 50` for 5 minutes — backlog or broker stuck |
| `redis_rejected_connections_total` | Rejected because `maxclients` hit | any non-zero rate is Tier-1 |
| `redis_keyspace_hits / (hits + misses)` | Cache hit ratio | `< 0.7` on cache DB suggests over-eviction or under-warmed cache |
| `redis_commands_duration_seconds_sum` | Command latency | p99 > 50 ms — investigate slowlog |
| `redis_master_link_status` (replicas) | Replication health | `!= 1` for 1 minute in HA |

> | `redis_master_last_io_seconds_ago` (replicas) | Replication lag | `> 30` for 5 minutes |

Reviewer 2: Should any of these be also (or instead) documented in `alerting.md`?

```

**Suggested resolution(s):** Identify the offending App from the slow command text and replace the unbounded cache key with a bounded one (paginate, scope to a tenant, or cache per-object instead of per-collection). To attribute the Redis latency back to the *Nautobot request* that caused it, pair this with [Request Profiling](./request-profiling.md) — `django-silk` records cache calls per request alongside SQL queries.

### HA Considerations

**Potential Issue:** In a Redis Sentinel topology, a replica that has just been demoted (or one that never became master in the first place) still answers `redis-cli ping` with `PONG`, so a basic liveness check passes against a node Nautobot cannot read or write data from.

**Artifact or data:** Redis's `INFO replication` block carries the node's current role.

**Query:**

```bash
redis-cli INFO replication | grep role:master
```

**Suggested resolution(s):** Add the query above as a secondary liveness probe alongside `redis-cli ping`, so a demoted node gets caught at the probe layer rather than after the first failed read or write. See [Health Checks](./health-checks.md) for wiring details.

> ## PostgreSQL

Reviewer 2: Need similar docs for MySQL?

### Connection Topology

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    W[Web pods] --> PB[PgBouncer]
    K[Workers] --> PB
    B[Beat] --> PB
    PB --> P[(PostgreSQL primary)]
    P -. streaming replication .-> R[(Replicas)]
```

For per-component liveness probes against PgBouncer, the primary, and the replicas, see [Health Checks — PostgreSQL](./health-checks.md#postgresql).

Three observations drive Nautobot-specific PostgreSQL load:

1. **Every Nautobot process holds its own connection pool.** Without PgBouncer, `web pods × workers × concurrency` quickly exceeds Postgres `max_connections`. Use PgBouncer in `transaction` mode.
2. **Workers and Beat connect too.** A common mistake is to size PgBouncer for web traffic only, then starve Celery during sync windows.
3. **Long-running Jobs hold connections open.** A Job that loops over devices for an hour holds a transaction (and a connection) for an hour. Combined with PgBouncer in `transaction` mode, this can pin a backend slot.

### High-Churn Tables

A handful of tables bloat fastest in a typical Nautobot deployment:

> - `extras_objectchange` — every model write emits a row. Retention controlled by [`CHANGELOG_RETENTION`](../configuration/settings.md#changelog_retention) (days; default 90, `0` disables retention enforcement).

Reviewer 2: Note that `CHANGELOG_RETENTION` doesn't itself do anything since v2.3.0 - it just provides a default threshold for the `Logs Cleanup` job when that job is run.

**Potential Issue:** A page or Job is reported as slow and the root cause is one or more queries dominating database time. The biggest offenders are usually filter combinations on large tables without a supporting index, or N+1 query loops in Job code.

**Artifact or data:** The `pg_stat_statements` extension retains aggregated stats per normalized query — total time, mean time, call count, rows. As a SQL artifact, it can be queried from `psql` directly or, in environments where operators don't have direct database access, through `nautobot-server dbshell` (which opens a session using Nautobot's own credentials). It can also be queried from [Grafana](./visualization.md#3-backing-stores).

Enable on the primary:

```sql
-- in postgresql.conf
shared_preload_libraries = 'pg_stat_statements'
pg_stat_statements.track = top

-- then per-database
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_stat_statements;
```

**Query:**

```sql
SELECT
    LEFT(query, 80) AS query,
    calls,
    ROUND(total_exec_time::numeric, 0) AS total_ms,
    ROUND(mean_exec_time::numeric, 1) AS mean_ms
FROM pg_stat_statements
WHERE query NOT LIKE '%pg_stat%'
ORDER BY total_exec_time DESC
LIMIT 20;
```

> **Suggested resolution(s):** Add the missing index for filter combinations on large tables; refactor N+1 loops in Job code into a single bulk query using `prefetch_related` or `select_related`. `pg_stat_statements` aggregates across the whole database — when you have not yet identified *which* view is slow, start with the [Visualization — View Latency](./visualization.md#6-view-latency) dashboard to find the slowest view, then attribute its SQL through [Request Profiling](./request-profiling.md) — `django-silk` records each request's SQL queries with timing.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should be recommending administrators to add their own indices to the tables - this should be done via a migration implemented in Nautobot itself or in the relevant App.
